In Part IV we will cover various algorithms that are used to generate shadow data.
Shadows are the dark companions of lights and although both can exist on their
own, they shouldn’t exist without each other in games. Achieving good visual
results in rendering shadows is still considered one of the particularly difficult
tasks of graphics programmers. One of the trends in this shadow section is the
description of implementations that achieve perceptually correct looking shadows;
in real-time graphics terminology, called soft shadows. Three articles build on
Randy Fernando’s work, “Percentage-Closer Soft Shadows,” that is now—five
years after it was published—still an efficient way to implement soft shadows on
the current generation of hardware.
The first article in this section, “Variance Shadow Maps Light-Bleeding Reduction Tricks,” by Wojciech Sterna, covers techniques to reduce light bleeding.
There is also an example application that shows the technique.
Pavlo Turchyn covers fast soft shadows with adaptive shadow maps—as used
in Age of Conan—in his article “Fast Soft Shadows via Adaptive Shadow Maps.”
The article describes the extension of percentage-closer filtering to adaptive shadow
maps that was implemented in the game. Turchyn proposes a multiresolution
filtering method in which three additional, smaller shadow maps with sizes of
1024 × 1024, 512 × 512 and 256 × 256 are created from a 2048 × 2048 shadow
map. The key observation is that the result of the PCF kernel over a 3 × 3 area
of a 1024×1024 shadow map is a reasonably accurate approximation for filtering
over a 6 × 6 area of a 2048 × 2048 shadow map. Similarly, a 3 × 3 filter kernel of
a 256 × 256 shadow map approximates a 24 × 24 area of a 2048 × 2048 shadow
map.
The article “Adaptive Volumetric Shadow Maps” by Marco Salvi et al. describes a new approach for real-time shadows that supports high-quality shadowing from dynamic volumetric media such as hair, smoke, and fog. Adaptive
volumetric shadow maps (AVSM) encode the fraction of visible light from the
light source over the interval [0, 1] as a function of depth at each texel. This
transmittance function and the depth value are then stored for each texel and
sorted front-to-back. This is called the AVSM representation. This AVSM representation is generated by first rendering all visible transparent fragments in
a linked list (see the article “Order-Independent Transparency Using Per-Pixel
206 IV Shadows
Linked Lists in DirectX 11” for the description of per-pixel linked lists). In a
subsequent pass, those linked lists are compressed into the AVSM representation,
consisting of the transmittance value and the depth value.
Another article that describes the fast generation of soft shadows is “Fast Soft
Shadows With Temporal Coherence” by Daniel Scherzer et al. The light source
is sampled over multiple frames instead of a single frame, creating only a single
shadow map with each frame. The individual shadow test results are then stored
in a screen-space shadow buffer. This buffer is recreated in each frame using
the shadow buffer from the previous frame as input. This previous frame holds
only shadowing information for pixels that were visible in the previous frame.
Pixels that become newly visible in this frame due to camera or object movement
have no shadowing information stored in this buffer. For these pixels the article
describes a spatial-filtering method to estimate the soft shadow results. In other
words the main idea of the algorithm described in the article is to formulate lightsource area sampling in an iterative manner, evaluating only a single shadow map
per frame.
The last article in the section, “MipMapped Screen Space Soft Shadows,”
by Alberto Aguado et al. uses similar ideas as the other two soft-shadow articles. Soft shadows are generated with the help of mipmaps to represent multifrequency shadows for screen-space filtering. The mipmap has two channels; the
first channel stores the shadow-intensity values and the second channel stores
screen-space penumbra widths. Shadow values are obtained by filtering while
penumbrae widths are propagated by flood filling. After the mipmap is generated, the penumbrae values are used as indices to the mipmap levels. Thus, we
transform the problem of shadow generation into the problem of selecting levels
in a mipmap. This approach is extended by including layered shadow maps to
improve shadows with multiple occlusions.
—Wolfgang Engel
1
IV
Variance Shadow Maps
Light-Bleeding Reduction Tricks
Wojciech Sterna
1.1 Introduction
Variance Shadow Maps (VSMs) were first introduced in [Donnelly and Lauritzen 06] as an alternative to bilinear percentage closer filtering (PCF) to speed
up rendering of smoothed shadows. The algorithm is relatively inexpensive, easy
to implement, and very effective in rendering shadows with large penumbra regions. However, VSM has one major drawback—apparent light-bleeding—which
occurs when two or more shadow casters cover each other in light-space. This article will show techniques that help to reduce the light-bleeding artifacts in VSM.
1.2 VSM Overview
The idea of variance shadow mapping is to store in the shadow map, instead
of a single depth value, a distribution of depth values over some region and to
use elementary statistics to evaluate the shadowing term. This approach makes
it possible to use filtering methods (bilinear, trilinear, blurring) on the shadow
map. A common option is to use Gaussian blur on the shadow map to achieve
soft shadows in O(n) time. This is a great advantage over traditional PCF which
requires O(n
2
) time to achieve the same effect.
To generate the variance shadow map, two values must be written into it.
The first is simply a distance from a light source to a pixel, as with traditional
shadow mapping (one thing that is important here is that this distance should
have a linear metric). The second component of the shadow map is a square of
the first component.
Once the shadow map has been prepared (it contains both depth and a square
of depth), additional filtering can be applied to it. To achieve good-looking soft
shadows, a separable Gaussian filter with 5 × 5 taps can be used.
207
208 IV Shadows
To estimate the shadow contribution from such a defined VSM, so-called
Chebyshev’s inequality (one-tailed version) can be used to estimate the shadowing term:
P(O ≥ R) ≤ pmax(R) ≡
σ
2
σ
2 + (R − µ)
2
, where µ < R (1.1)
The variable O is an occluder’s depth (shadow map’s texel), R is a receiver’s depth
(distance from a pixel being shaded to a light source), σ
2
is the variance and µ is
the mean. The term P(O ≥ R) can roughly be interpreted as a probability of a
point (at distance R) being lit (unshadowed by a point at distance O), which is
the exact value we wish to know, and Chebyshev’s inequality gives us an upperbound to this value.
The mean and variance in Equation (1.1) are computed from the first and
second statistical moments:
M1 = E(O)
M2 = E(O
2
)
µ = M1 = E(O)
σ
2 = M2 − M1
2 = E(O
2
) − E(O)
2
In fact, the first moment is what is actually stored in the first channel of the
shadow map, and the second moment in the second channel of the shadow map.
That’s why the shadow map can be additionally prefiltered before its use—the
moments are defined by the expectation operator which is linear and can thus be
linearly filtered.
A sample implementation of standard VSM is shown in Listing 1.1.
f l o a t VSM( f loat2 pro jTexCoord , f l o a t depth , f l o a t bi a s )
{
f loat2 moments = tex2D ( shadowMap linear , pro jTexCoord ) . r g ;
i f (moments . x >= depth − bi a s )
return 1. 0 f ;
f l o a t v a ri a n c e = moments . y − moments . x∗moments . x ;
f l o a t d el t a = depth − moments . x ;
f l o a t p max = v a ri a n c e / ( v a ri a n c e + d e l t a ∗ d el t a ) ;
return s a t u r a t e ( p max ) ;
}
Listing 1.1. Standard VSM implementation.
1. Variance Shadow Maps Light-Bleeding Reduction Tricks 209
Note that the given Chebyshev’s inequality (its one-tailed version) is undefined
for cases in which µ ≥ R. Of course, in such a case a point is fully lit, so the
function returns 1.0; otherwise, pmax is returned.
1.3 Light-Bleeding
Light-bleeding (see Figure 1.1) occurs when two or more shadow casters cover
each other in light-space, causing light (these are actually soft edges of shadows
of the objects closest to the light) to bleed onto the shadows of further (from the
light) objects. Figure 1.2 shows this in detail.
As can be seen from the picture in Figure 1.2, object C is lit over a filter
region. The problem is that when estimating the shadow contribution for pixels
of object C over this region, the variance and mean that are used are actually
based on the samples from object A (red line) and visible samples from object B
(green line) (the shadow map consists of pixels colored by red and green lines),
whereas they should be based on samples from object B only (green and blue
lines). Moreover, the greater the ratio of distances ∆x
∆y
(see Figure 1.2), the more
apparent the light-bleeding is on object C.
The VSM is not capable of storing more information (about occluded pixels
of object B for instance). This is not even desirable since we want to keep the
Figure 1.1. Light-bleeding.
210 IV Shadows
Figure 1.2. How light-bleeding occurs.
algorithm simple and don’t want to raise its memory requirements. Fortunately,
the following sections in this chapter will present a few very simple tricks that
can greatly reduce the problem.
1.4 Solutions to the Problem
1.4.1 Cutting the Tail Off
The first way of reducing light-bleeding was simply cutting off the tail of the pmax
function. Put simply, it’s about subtracting some fixed value from the result of
pmax. This way, incorrect penumbra regions will get darker but so will the correct
ones. However, intensities of incorrect penumbra regions never reach 1 (as shown
in [Lauritzen 07]) so the final result can still look good when the cutting value is
chosen wisely.
Figure 1.3 shows a side-by-side comparison of standard VSM implementation
and the same VSM but with pmax cut off by a value of 0.15. Although the
light-bleeding is still present it’s much less obvious.
As we mentioned earlier, the light-bleeding gets more noticeable when the
ratio ∆x
∆y
is big. In such a scenario (high depth complexity) it is next to impossible
to eliminate the problem by applying only a cutting value. More sophisticated
methods are necessary.
1. Variance Shadow Maps Light-Bleeding Reduction Tricks 211
Figure 1.3. VSM and VSM with pmax cut off by 0.15.
1.4.2 Applying VSM to Shadow Boundaries
One of the possibilities for reducing the problem of light-bleeding is, simply to
avoid it. The trick is to combine standard depth-comparison shadow mapping
with VSM applied only to regions that really need it—shadow boundaries.
The problem with this idea is that the greater the penumbra region, the
harder it gets to properly detect shadow boundaries, since more samples are
needed. However, if one decides not to blur the shadow map and to rely only
on standard hardware linear (or trilinear) filtering, four samples are enough to
detect shadow boundaries; light-bleeding free VSM is achieved with the resulting
performance comparable to that from standard VSM.
Figure 1.4 shows a side-by-side comparison of standard VSM and the combination of classic shadow mapping with VSM applied only to shadow boundaries.
Figure 1.4. VSM and VSM applied to shadow boundaries.
1.4.3 Exponential Variance Shadow Maps
EVSM is a combination of two techniques—variance shadow maps and exponential shadow maps, which were described in [Salvi 08]. The idea was first presented
in [Lauritzen 08] and it is surprising that it is not recognized among developers,
for it is able to almost completely eliminate the light-bleeding.
212 IV Shadows
Figure 1.5. ESM with the following constants: 10, 50, 90, 200.
ESMs work similarly to VSMs. A very nice feature of ESM is that it requires
only a single-channel shadow map, which stores the first moment. The algorithm
also uses statistical methods to estimate the shadowing term and it does so by
using the so-called Markov inequality (as opposed to VSM which uses Chebyshev’s
inequality):
P(O ≥ R) ≤
E(O)
R
(1.2)
Using Markov inequality as given in Equation (1.2) doesn’t provide a good shadow
approximation; shadows suffer from a sort of global light-bleeding. However,
[Salvi 08] shows that it can be transformed to the following representation:
P(e
kO ≥ e
kR) ≤
E(e
kO)
e
kR (1.3)
Constant k determines how good the approximation is—the greater the value, the
better the approximation. Unfortunately, large values cause precision loss, and
shadow boundaries become sharper, so a compromise must be found. Figure 1.5
shows a comparison of ESM with different values of constant k.
ESM is simpler, faster, and has a tweakable light-bleeding parameter that
makes it more practical than VSM in many cases. However, a very promising
idea is the combination of these two techniques—EVSM. Instead of storing depth
and a square of depth in the shadow map, we store an exponential of depth
and a square of exponential of depth. The exponential function has the effect of
decreasing the ratio ∆x
∆y
and thus reduces the VSM-like light-bleeding.
1. Variance Shadow Maps Light-Bleeding Reduction Tricks 213
Figure 1.6. VSM and EVSM with pmax cut off by 0.05 and k = 50.
EVSM suffers from light-bleeding only in cases when both VSM and ESM
fail, which rarely happens. A very important feature of EVSM is that the lightbleeding can be controlled by two factors: VSM with the tail cut off and ESM
with k constant. Careful adjustment of these two will lead to very pleasing and
accurate soft shadows.
Figure 1.6 shows a side-by-side comparison of standard VSM and EVSM.
1.5 Sample Application
In the web materials accompanying this book there is a demo presenting all of
the techniques described in this chapter.
Here is the key configuration:
• WSAD + mouse—camera movement;
• Shift—speeding up;
• F1 - F5—change of shadowing technique;
• E/Q—turn on/off shadow map Gaussian blurring;
• R/F—increase/decrease VSM tail cut off parameter;
• T/G—increase/decrease ESM constant k.
The core of the demo are two shader files: shadow map.ps and light.ps.
Implementations of all algorithms described here can be found in these files.
1.6 Conclusion
Variance shadow mapping has already proven to be a great way of generating
soft shadows. The algorithm is easy to implement, fast, and utilizes hardware
features of modern GPUs. Despite its advantages, VSM also introduces some
214 IV Shadows
problems. The worst one is light-bleeding, which was the subject of discussion in
this chapter.
Bibliography
[Donnelly and Lauritzen 06] William Donnelly and Andrew Lauritzen. “Variance
Shadow Maps.”, 2006. Available online (http://www.punkuser.net/vsm/).
[Lauritzen 07] Andrew Lauritzen. “Summed-Area Variance Shadow Maps.” In GPU
Gems 3, Chapter II.8. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2007.
[Lauritzen 08] Andrew Lauritzen. Master’s thesis, University of Waterloo, 2008.
[Salvi 08] Marci Salvi. “Rendering Filtered Shadows with Exponential Shadow Maps.”
In ShaderX6
, Chapter IV.3. Hingham, MA: Charles River Media, 2008.
2
IV
Fast Soft Shadows via Adaptive
Shadow Maps
Pavlo Turchyn
We describe a percentage-closer filtering (PCF) based extension to an adaptive
shadow maps (ASM) algorithm [Fernando et al. 01]. Our method enables highquality rendering of large penumbrae with minimal size of filter-kernel size. It also
offers better image quality compared to other PCF-based soft shadows algorithms,
such as percentage closer soft shadows (PCSS).
2.1 Percentage-Closer Filtering with Large Kernels
Filtering is an important part of every shadow mapping implementation because
it serves multiple goals: it reduces aliasing artifacts and allows the creation of
soft shadows to improve image realism. Aliasing artifacts manifest themselves
when there are either too many shadow map texels per screen area (resulting in
the same type of noise that can be observed on regular color textures without
mipmapping), or there are too few shadow map texels per screen area, so the
shadow map cannot plausibly represent the correct shapes of shadows. However,
filtering alone can reduce only the visual impact of undersampling to a certain
extent.
PCF is a common method of shadow map filtering. Given shadow map coordinates uv, and depth value d, a PCF computes the following weighted sum:
PCF(DepthTexture, uv, d, n) =
Xn
i=1

Weight[i] ∗ (tex2D(DepthTexture, uv + Offset[i])).r > d
.
The tables Weight and Offset hold weights and the texture coordinates offsets,
respectively. The choice of Weight and Offset defines performance and quality
of rendering. The computationally fastest way is to use constant tables. In more
elaborate schemes, the tables are constructed based on coordinates uv.
215
216 IV Shadows
Figure 2.1. Soft shadows in Age of Conan.
The number of samples n is chosen depending on the size of the area over
which the filtering is performed. Summing over the area of m × m shadow map
texels would require at least n = m2
samples if we want to account for all texels.
However, such a quadratic complexity of the filter makes PCF impractical for
filtering over large areas. For instance, if the size of a shadow map texel’s projection onto a scene’s geometry is 0.1 m, and the desired penumbra size is about
1.5 meters, then we need to apply PCF over (1.5/0.1) × (1.5/0.1) = 15 × 15 area,
which in turn gives n = 225.
It is possible to use PCF with large kernels in time-sensitive applications
by decreasing the number of samples, so that n  m2
, and distributing the
samples pseudorandomly over the summation area. Such an approach produces
penumbra with noise artifacts as shown in Figure 2.2. A screen-space low-pass
filtering can be used for suppressing the noise, but such a post-filtering removes all
high-frequency features within penumbra indiscriminately. Moreover, preventing
shadows from bleeding into undesired areas in screen space may require the use
of relatively expensive filters,( e.g., a bilateral filter).
We propose a multiresolution filtering (MRF) method that attempts to alleviate the PCF problem described above. The idea is as follows: When we
create the standard shadow map for the scene, we also create versions of it with
progressively lower resolutions. For example, if the shadow map’s resolution is
2048 × 2048, we create three additional shadow maps: 1024 × 1024, 512 × 512,
and 256 × 256. The key observation is that the result of PCF over a 3 × 3 area of
a 1024 × 1024 shadow map is a reasonably accurate approximation for filtering
over 6×6 area of 2048×2048 map. Similarly, PCF over a 3×3 area of a 256×256
shadow map approximates a 6 × 6 filter for a 512 × 512 map, a 12 × 12 filter for
a 1024 × 1024 map, and a 24 × 24 filter for a 2048 × 2048 map. Thus, in order to
2. Fast Soft Shadows via Adaptive Shadow Maps 217
Figure 2.2. Filtering comparison. From top to bottom: bilinear PCF; 24 × 24 PCF
filter with 32 samples, frame rendering time on Radeon 4870 is 3.1 ms; 24 × 24 PCF
filter with 64 samples, 6.7 ms; 24 × 24 MRF filter (3 × 3 PCF), 3.1 ms.
approximate PCF with large kernels, we apply PCF with a small kernel size to a
shadow map with reduced resolution.
Approximating arbitrary kernel size. Let us number shadow maps starting with
zero index assigned to the shadow map with the highest resolution
sampler2D shadowMaps[4] = { shadowMap2048x2048,
shadowMap1024x1024, shadowMap512x512, shadowMap256x256 };
Such a numbering is similar to the numbering of mipmaps of color textures.
Suppose we want to approximate an m × m PCF with an MRF based on nine
218 IV Shadows
samples of a 3 × 3 PCF. The index of the shadow map, which can be used to get
an adequate approximation, is computed as
float shadowMapIndex = log2( max(1.0, m/3.0) );
The value shadowMapIndex is a real number (e.g., the value shadowMapIndex
=2.415 corresponds to a 16 × 16 kernel), so we have to either round it toward
the closest integer, or perform the following interpolation, which is similar to the
one used in standard trilinear filtering:
float shadowIntensity = lerp(
PCF(shadowMaps[ floor(shadowMapIndex) ], uv, d, 9),
PCF(shadowMaps[ ceil(shadowMapIndex) ], uv, d, 9),
frac(shadowMapIndex) );
Pros and cons. MRF enables creating large penumbrae with only a few depth texture samples. Since it is based on a small number of samples, it allows the computiation of shadow intensities using relatively complex filter kernels, which can
produce continuous values without the noise inherent to plain PCF kernels with a
low number of samples. As a result, MRF does not require any type of postfiltering. Compared to prefiltering methods, (e.g. [Donnelly and Lauritzen 06], [Annen
et al. 07], [Annen et al. 08]), MRF does not introduce approximation-specific artifacts, such as light leaking, ringing, or precision deficiencies. Moreover, since
MRF is based on a regular PCF, it is possible to utilize existing hardware features,
for example hardware bilinear PCF or double-speed depth-only rendering.
2.2 Application to Adaptive Shadow Maps
Adaptive shadow maps (ASM) is a method that addresses perspective and projection aliasing that occurs in standard shadow mapping [Fernando et al. 01].
Another notable advantage of ASM is the ability to exploit frame-to-frame coherency, which was the main reason for implementing the method in Funcom’s
Age of Conan. The algorithm is shown schematically in Figure 2.3. The major
steps of the algorithm are explained below.
Creating tiles hierarchy. We start by projecting the view frustum onto the near
plane of the light’s frustum. The projected frustum is clipped against a grid
defined on this plane. This grid is view independent and static (does not change
from frame to frame). Each grid cell intersecting with the frustum is called a
tile. If a tile is closer to the projected frustum’s top than a certain threshold
distance, we subdivide it into four equal cells (in a quadtree-like fashion). Each
resulting cell is tested against the frustum, and the cells intersecting with it are
called child tiles. We continue the subdivision process to obtain a hierarchy of
tiles as shown in Figure 2.3. Note that unlike for example, the cascaded shadow
2. Fast Soft Shadows via Adaptive Shadow Maps 219
Figure 2.3. Adaptive Shadow Maps.
maps algorithm, here we do not subdivide the frustum itself; instead we use the
frustum to determine which grid cells it intersects.
Shadow maps rendering. We render a fixed-resolution shadow map (e.g., 256×256)
for every tile. Shadow maps are allocated from the single atlas (we use 4096×2048
depth texture in Age of Conan). Normally, there could be many tiles (about 100
in Age of Conan), but due to frame-to-frame coherency there is a high probability
that a given shadow map was already rendered during previous frames. This is
controlled through a shadow maps cache with LRU caching policy, (i.e., if the
shadow map for a new tile is not present in the cache, then the shadow map
which has not been in use for the largest number of frames will be reassigned to
this tile).
Scene rendering. Since all shadow maps are equal in size, the shadow map sampling function requires knowledge only of the shadow map’s offset within the atlas.
These offsets are stored in a small dynamic index texture (we use a 128 × 128
texture). One can think of index texture as a standard shadow map that covers
the entire view range, but instead of depth values, each texel contains the offsets, which are used to locate the actual tile shadow map in the atlas. Shadow
map sampling code is given in Listing 2.1. As one can see, the only difference is
index-texture indirection.
Pros and cons. ASM enables rendering of highly detailed shadows. Similar shadow
mapping quality can be achieved only with standard shadow mapping when using
a shadow map of very high resolution (for example, the resolution of an equivalent shadow map in Age of Conan is 16384×16384). Unlike projection-modifying
approaches, such as [Stamminger and Drettakis 02] or [Martin and Tan 04], ASM
does not suffer from temporal aliasing (since the tile’s shadow map projection
220 IV Shadows
f l o a t standardShadowMapSampling ( f l o a t 4 s am pl e P o si ti o n )
{
f l o a t 4 shadowMapCoords =
mul ( s am pl e P o si ti o n , sh ad owP r o jec ti onM a t ri x ) ;
return PCF( shadowMapTexture , shadowMapCoords ) ;
}
f l o a t shadowMapSamplingASM ( f l o a t 4 s am pl e P o si ti o n )
{
f l o a t 4 indexCoo rds =
mul ( s am pl e P o si ti o n , sh ad owP r o jec ti onM a t ri x ) ;
f l o a t 3 o f f s e t = tex2D ( indexTex tu re , indexCoo rds . xy ) ;
f l o a t 2 C = f l o a t 2 ( tileShadowMapSize / a t l a s S i z e , 1 ) ;
f l o a t 3 shadowMapCoords = indexCoo rds ∗C. xxy + o f f s e t ;
return PCF( a tl a sT e x t u r e , shadowMapCoords ) ;
}
Listing 2.1. Standard shadow map sampling vs ASM sampling.
matrices are view independent) and offers an intuitive control over the shadow
map’s texel distribution.
However, ASM imposes certain restrictions on a scene’s granularity. Even
though such situations do not occur frequently, in some cases we might need to
render a number of shadow maps (we note that in Age of Conan we typically
render one tile per several frames). As an extreme example, consider a scene that
consists of just one huge object; the cost for rendering N shadow maps will be
N times the cost of rendering such a scene. On the other hand, imagine a scene
that consists of objects so small that they always overlap with just one tile; in
this case the cost for rendering N tile shadow maps will be less or equal to the
cost of whole scene. Therefore, a preferred scene should consist of a large number
of lightweight, spatially compact objects rather than a few big and expensive-torender geometry chunks.
Provided that granularity of the scene is reasonably fine and there is a certain
frame-to-frame coherency, ASM significantly reduces shadow map rendering costs
compared to standard shadow mapping. In this regard, one can view ASM as a
method for distributing the cost of rendering a single shadow map over multiple
frames.
A fundamental shortcoming of ASM is its inability to handle animated objects
because such objects require updating the shadow map with every frame, while
ASM relies on a shadow maps cache that holds data created over many frames.
Similarly, light’s position or direction cannot be changed on a per-frame basis
because such a change invalidates the cache. In Age of Conan we use a separate
2. Fast Soft Shadows via Adaptive Shadow Maps 221
1024 × 1024 shadow map for rendering dynamic objects. Such a shadow map
normally contains only a few objects, so it is inexpensive to render. Moreover,
one can apply prefiltering techniques, (e.g., variance shadow maps), which may
otherwise be problematic from the viewpoint of performance or quality. MRF
naturally applies to the hierarchy of shadow maps produced with ASM.
2.3 Soft Shadows with Variable Penumbra Size
PCF with a fixed kernel size does not yield realistic shadows because it produces
shadows with fixed penumbrae size, while penumbra in physically correct shadows
usually vary greatly across the scene. The larger the light’s area is, the bigger
the difference should be between shadows from small objects and big objects.
Thus, the kernel sizes in PCF should also vary depending on the estimated sizes
of penumbrae.
One method for estimating penumbra size is proposed in the percentage-closer
soft shadows (PCSS) scheme [Fernando 05]. In this method the size of a PCF
kernel is a linear function of distance between a shaded fragment and its nearest occluder. The process of estimating the distance, which is called blocker
search, largely resembles PCF; the difference is that instead of averaging results
of depth tests, during blocker search one averages weighted depth values. When
a light’s area is large, the blocker search has to be performed on a large number of shadow map texels and thus it becomes as expensive as PCF. Attempting
to reduce the number of samples may cause visible discontinuities and noise in
penumbrae.
We use a faster method to estimate the distance to the occluder. A depth
extent map (DEM) is a texture that contains minimum and maximum depth
values computed over a certain region of the shadow map, which is used for
detection of penumbrae regions [Isidoro and Sander 06]. We take the DEM’s
minimum depth value for the depth of the occluder, thus avoiding expensive
blocker search. Since minimum depth value is a noncontinuous function, its use
leads to discontinuities in penumbrae (such as clearly visible curves, along which
shadows are vastly different). We compute the DEM for a low-resolution shadow
map, and then use a single bilinear texture fetch to obtain piecewise-linear depth.
The drawback of such an approach is the additional space required for storing the
DEM. However, the DEM can be stored at a lower resolution than the resolution
of the shadow map.
Occluders fusion. The most outstanding defect of PCF-based soft shadows is incorrect occluder fusion. The larger the penumbra size is, the more the artifacts
stand out (see e.g., Figure 2.5(a)). The main source of the problem, illustrated in
Figure 2.4, is the inability of a single shadow map to capture information needed
222 IV Shadows
Figure 2.4. Shadow map layering.
to create shadows from area light. Each texel of a shadow map contains visibility information for a single light direction only, though light propagates along a
range of directions.
This problem can be reduced relatively easily within the ASM framework.
For a small set of tiles, which are closer to the viewer than a certain threshold
distance, we render two shadow maps instead of one. First we create a regular
shadow map and its corresponding DEM. Let dmax be the shadow map’s range.
Then, we create a layer shadow map, which is identical to the regular one, except
that it is constructed using the fragments with depths within the range [d +
dc, dmax] (fragments with depth outside this range are discarded), where d is the
corresponding minimum depth value from the DEM constructed for the regular
shadow map, and dc is a constant chosen by user. The penumbra over the scene’s
objects located within the range [0; d+dc] will be created using a regular shadow
map only, thus occluder fusion will not be correct. However, one can use a layer
shadow map to correct the penumbra on the objects located beyond d + dc, as
shown in Figure 2.5(b).
Shadow map layering significantly improved image quality in Age of Conan,
removing a vast majority of occluder fusion artifacts. While theoretically one may
utilize more than one layer, in Age of Conan one layer appeared to be sufficient.
Adding more layers did not lead to any noticeable improvements.
2. Fast Soft Shadows via Adaptive Shadow Maps 223
(a) PCSS (from NVIDIA Direct3D SDK 10
Code Samples.)
(b) ASM + MRF + layering.
Figure 2.5. Occluders fusion: PCSS filters out penumbra details, ASM allows keeping
them.
2.4 Results
We implemented our soft shadows algorithm in Funcom’s MMORPG Age of Conan. Figure 2.6 shows in-game benchmark of two shadow mapping methods
tested on Intel Core i7 2.66 MHz and AMD Radeon 4850.
Originally, the shadowing method in the released version of Age of Conan
was standard shadow mapping, and cascaded shadow maps were added a year
later with a patch. As shown in Figure 2.6, standard shadow mapping resulted
in approximately 30% frame rate drop. The cascaded shadow map performance
Figure 2.6. Benchmark: fly-by over a level from Age of Conan.
224 IV Shadows
(not shown here) was worse. Implementing ASM-based soft shadows provided not
only a substantial increase in image quality, but also a significant performance
boost. We use ASM (with MRF and layering) to create shadows from static
objects, and a separate 1024 × 1024 shadow map for dynamic objects, which is
filtered with a fixed-size 3 × 3 PCF kernel.
Bibliography
[Annen et al. 07] Thomas Annen, Tom Mertens, P. Bekaert, Hans-Peter Seidel, and
Jan Kautz. “Convolution Shadow Maps.” In European Symposium on Rendering,
pp. 51–60. Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland: Eurographics Association, 2007.
[Annen et al. 08] Thomas Annen, Tom Mertens, Hans-Peter Seidel, Eddy Flerackers,
and Jan Kautz. “Exponential Shadow Maps.” In GI ’08: Proceedings of Graphics
Interface 2008, pp. 155–161. Toronto, Canada: Canadian Information Processing
Society, 2008.
[Donnelly and Lauritzen 06] William Donnelly and Andrew Lauritzen. “Variance
Shadow Maps.” In I3D ’06: Proceedings of the 2006 Symposium on Interactive
3D Graphics and Games, pp. 161–165. New York: ACM, 2006.
[Fernando et al. 01] Randima Fernando, Sebastian Fernandez, Kavita Bala, and Donald P. Greenberg. “Adaptive Shadow Maps.” In SIGGRAPH ’01: Proceedings of
the 28th Annual Cconference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques,
pp. 387–390. New York: ACM, 2001.
[Fernando 05] Randima Fernando. “Percentage-Closer Soft Shadows.” In SIGGRAPH
’05: ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Sketches, p. 35. New York: ACM, 2005.
[Isidoro and Sander 06] John R. Isidoro and Pedro V. Sander. “Edge Masking and
Per-Texel Depth Extent Propagation For Computation Culling During Shadow
Mapping.” In ShaderX5
: Advanced Rendering Techniques. Hingham:MA: Charles
River Media, 2006.
[Martin and Tan 04] Tobias Martin and Tiow-Seng Tan. “Anti-Aliasing and Continuity with Trapezoidal Shadow Maps.” In Proceedings of Eurographics Symposium
on Rendering, pp. 153–160. Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland: Eurographics Association,
2004.
[Stamminger and Drettakis 02] Marc Stamminger and George Drettakis. “Perspective
Shadow Maps.” In SIGGRAPH ’02: Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference
on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, pp. 557–562. New York: ACM,
2002.
3
IV
Adaptive Volumetric
Shadow Maps
Marco Salvi, Kiril Vidimˇce, Andrew Lauritzen,
Aaron Lefohn, and Matt Pharr
This chapter describes adaptive volumetric shadow maps (AVSM), a new approach for real-time shadows that supports high-quality shadowing from dynamic
volumetric media such as hair and smoke. AVSMs compute approximate volumetric shadows for real-time applications such as games, for which predictable
performance and a fixed, small memory footprint are required (and for which
approximate solutions are acceptable).
We first introduced AVSM in a paper at the 2010 Eurographics Symposium on
Rendering [Salvi et al. 10]; this chapter reviews the main ideas in the paper and
details how to efficiently implement AVSMs on DX11-class graphics hardware.
AVSMs are practical on today’s high-end GPUs; for example, rendering Figure 3.4
requires 8.6 ms with opacity shadow maps (OSMs) and 12.1 ms with AVSMs—an
incremental cost of 3.5 ms to both build the AVSM data structure and to use it
for final rendering.
3.1 Introduction and Previous Approaches
Realistic lighting of volumetric and participating media such as smoke, fog, or
hair adds significant richness and realism to rendered scenes. Self-shadowing provides important visual cues that define the shape and structure of such media.
However, in order to compute self-shadowing in volumetric media, it is necessary to accumulate partial occlusion between visible points and light sources in
the scene; doing so requires capturing the effect of all of the volumetric objects
between two points and is generally much more expensive than computing shadows from opaque surfaces. As such, while it is common for offline renderers
(e.g., those used in film rendering) to compute volumetric shadows, the computation and memory costs required to simulate light transport through participating
225
226 IV Shadows
Figure 3.1. This image shows self-shadowing smoke and hair, both seamlessly rendered
into the same adaptive volumetric shadow map. (Hair model courtesy of Cem Yuksel).
media have limited their use in real-time applications. Existing solutions for realtime volumetric shadowing exhibit slicing artifacts due to nonadaptive sampling,
cover only a limited depth range, or are limited to one type of media (e.g., only
hair, only smoke, etc.).
Adaptive shadow representations such as deep shadow maps have been used
widely in offline rendering [Lokovic and Veach 00, Xie et al. 07]. Deep shadow
maps store an adaptive, lossy-compressed representation of the visibility function
for each light-space texel, though it is not clear how they can be implemented
efficiently enough for real-time performance on today’s graphics hardware, due
to their high costs in term of storage and memory bandwidth.
Many volumetric shadowing techniques have been developed for interactive
rendering. See our paper [Salvi et al. 10] for a detailed discussion of previous
approaches; here,in this chapter, we will highlight the most widely known alternatives. A number of approaches discretize space into regularly spaced slices,
for example opacity shadow maps [Kim and Neumann 01]. These methods typically suffer from aliasing, with variations specialized to handle small particles
that can display view-dependent shadow popping artifacts even with static volumes [Green 08]. Deep opacity maps improve upon opacity shadow maps specifically for hair rendering by warping the sampling positions in the first depth
3. Adaptive Volumetric Shadow Maps 227
layer [Yuksel and Keyser 08]. Occupancy maps also target hair rendering and
use regular sampling, but capture many more depth layers than opacity- or deepopacity- shadow maps by using only one bit per layer. However, they are limited
to volumes composed of occluders with identical opacity [Sintorn and Assarson 09]. Mertens et al. describe a fixed-memory shadow algorithm for hair that
adaptively places samples based on a k-means clustering estimate of the transmittance function, assuming density is uniformly distributed within a small number
of clusters [Mertens et al. 04]. Recently, Jansen and Bavoil introduced Fourier
opacity mapping, which addresses the problem of banding artifacts, but where
the detail in shadows is limited by the depth range of volume samples along a
ray and may exhibit ringing artifacts [Jansen and Bavoil 10]. Finally, Enderton
et al. [Enderton et al. 10] have introduced a technique for handling all types of
transparent occluders in a fixed amount of storage for both shadow and primary
visibility, generating a stochastically sampled visibility function, though their
approach requires a large number of samples for good results.
AVSM generates an adaptively sampled representation of the volumetric transmittance in a shadow-map-like data structure, where each texel stores a compact approximation of the transmittance curve along the corresponding light
ray. AVSM can capture and combine transmittance data from arbitrary dynamic
occluders, including combining soft media like smoke and well-localized denser
media such as hair. It is thus both a versatile and a robust approach, suitable
for handling volumetric shadows in a variety of situations in practice. The main
innovation introduced by AVSM is a new, streaming lossy compression algorithm
that is capable of building a constant-storage, variable-error representation of
visibility for later use in shadow lookups.
3.2 Algorithm and Implementation
Adaptive volumetric shadow maps encode the fraction of visible light from the
light source over the interval [0, 1] as a function of depth at each texel. This quantity, the transmittance, is the quantity needed for rendering volumetric shadows.
It is defined as
t(z) = e−
R z
0
f(x) dx
, (3.1)
where f(x) is an attenuation function that represents the amount of light absorbed or scattered along a light ray (see Figure 3.2).
The AVSM representation stores a fixed-size array of irregularly placed samples of the transmittance function. Array elements, the nodes of the approximation, are sorted front-to-back, with each node storing a pair of depth and
transmittance values (di
, ti). Because we adaptively place the nodes in depth,
we can represent a rich variety of shadow blockers, from soft and transmissive
particles to sharp and opaque occluders. The number of nodes stored per texel
is a user-defined quantity, the only requirement being that we store two or more
228 IV Shadows
1
0
A
Transmittance
Depth
B
1
0Transmittance
Depth
Figure 3.2. AVSM computes a compressed representation of transmittance along a light
ray using an area-based curve simplification scheme. This figure depicts compressing
a 4-node curve to three nodes. The algorithm removes the node that results in the
smallest change in area under the curve, determined by computing the area of the
triangle created between the candidate node and its adjacent neighbors (triangles A
and B). The right figure shows that we remove the second node from the left because
triangle A is smaller than triangle B.
nodes per texel. More nodes allow for a better approximation of transmittance
and higher quality shadows, but at the expense of increased storage and computational costs. We have found that, in practice, 8–12 nodes (a cost of 64–96 bytes
per texel in the AVSM when full precision is used) give excellent results.
In HLSL code, our AVSM nodes are implemented with a simple structure:
#define AVSM_NODE_COUNT 8
#define AVSM_RT_COUNT (AVSM_NODE_COUNT / 4)
struct AVSMData
{
float4 depth[AVSM_RT_COUNT];
float4 trans[AVSM_RT_COUNT];
};
To simplify our implementation we always store a multiple of four nodes in
the AVSM. A group of four nodes fills two render targets (one for depth and one
for transmittance). This requirement sets a limit of sixteen nodes per texel since
current graphics APIs don’t allow binding of more than eight render targets at
once.
The following sections will describe first how we generate samples of the full
transmittance function, then how these samples are compressed into the AVSM
representation, and finally how they are interpolated at rendering time in shading
calculations.
3. Adaptive Volumetric Shadow Maps 229
3.2.1 Capturing Fragments of Transparent Objects
The first step in the implementation is to render from the light source and capture
a per-pixel linked list of all of the transparent fragments visible from the camera
at each pixel1
. A subsequent pass, described in the Section 3.2.3, compresses
these linked lists to the compact AVSM representation.
In a manner similar to that of standard shadow maps, AVSMs are created by
rendering the scene from the light’s viewpoint. AVSM can handle both opaque
objects and objects of varying thickness and density. We need to store all of the
transparent fragments up to the first opaque fragment, as well as the first opaque
fragment itself (if there is one). This information is enough to exactly specify the
transmittance curve as seen from the light source. (Transparent fragments behind
the first opaque one, as well as any subsequent opaque fragments are irrelevant,
since the first opaque fragment immediately drives the transmittance to zero for
all depths behind it.)
While it is not strictly necessary, in order to speed up the creation of a volumetric shadow map, we may begin by rendering the opaque objects into a depth
buffer to establish the depth beyond which we don’t need to capture transparent
fragments. We then render a pass that includes the transparent objects, using
the already-computed depth buffer for z-tests (with a less-than-or-equal-to test
mode), but with z-writes disabled. Each fragment that passes this test is added
to a per-pixel linked list of fragments.
The per-pixel linked lists of light-attenuating segments are captured using
DX11’s support for atomic gather/scatter memory operations in pixel shaders
[Yang et al. 10]. The basic idea is that a first r/w buffer is allocated with integer
pixel values, each pixel representing a pointer to the head of a list and initially
storing a “nil” value (e.g., -1.) These pointers encode offsets into a second larger
r/w buffer which stores all lists nodes. A pixel shader then allocates a node
from the second buffer by atomically incrementing a globally shared counter (see
DirectX11 UAV counters) whose value represents a pointer to a new node. It then
inserts at the head of the list the newly allocated node by atomically swapping
the previous head pointer with the new one. The content of the new node is
updated and its next pointer is set to the previous head of the list.
For our test scenes no more than 20 MB of this buffer is typically needed.
Listing 3.1 shows HLSL code for creating these per-pixel linked lists.
1While AVSM is designed to be a streaming compression algorithm, such an implementation
requires support for read-modify-write framebuffer operations in the pixel shader. DirectX11
adds the ability to perform unordered read-modify-write operations on certain buffer types in
the pixel shader; however, for AVSM’s transmittance-curve-simplification algorithm we need
to ensure that each pixel’s framebuffer memory is modified by only one fragment at a time
(per-pixel lock). Because current DX11 HLSL compilers forbid per-pixel locks, we implement
AVSM with variable-memory version that uses the current DX11 rendering pipeline to first
capture all transparent fragments seen from the light and then compressing them into the
AVSM representation.
230 IV Shadows
#def ine MAX BUFFER NODES (1<<24)
RWStructuredBu f fer<ListTexNode> gListTexSegmentNodesUAV ;
RWTexture2D<uin t> gListTexFirstNodeAddrUAV ;
// All o c a t e a g e n e r i c node
b o ol AllocNode ( out ui n t newNodeAddress )
{
// a l l o c a new node
newNodeAddress = gListTexNodesUAV . IncrementCounter ( ) ;
// runnin g out o f memory?
return newNodeAddress < MAX BUFFER NODES;
}
// I n s e r t a new node a t the head o f the l i s t
void I n s e r tN od e ( i n i n t 2 sc reenAdd re s s ,
i n ui n t newNodeAddress ,
i n ListTexNode newNode )
{
ui n t oldNodeAddress ;
I n t e rl o c k e d E x c h a n g e ( gListTexFirstNodeAddrUAV [ s c r e e nA d d r e s s ] ,
newNodeAddress ,
oldNodeAddress ) ;
newNode . next = oldNodeAddress ;
gListTexNodesUAV [ newNodeAddress ] = newNode ;
}
Listing 3.1. Node allocation and insertion code of a generic list (DirectX11/Shader
Model 5).
This process can also be used with transparent objects with finite extent
and uniform density in depth—not just billboards. Each object’s fragment can
store in the list start and end points along the corresponding ray from the light
source to define a segment, along with exit transmittance (entry transmittance
is implicitly assumed to be set to 1). For example, given billboards representing
spherical particles, we insert a segment representing the ray’s traversal through
the particle; for hair we insert a short segment where the light enters and exits
the hair strand; for opaque blockers, we insert a short, dense segment that takes
the transmittance to zero at the exit point.
3.2.2 AVSM Compression
After the relevant fragments have been captured in a list at each pixel, we need to
compute a compressed transmittance curve in a fixed amount of memory. Doing
3. Adaptive Volumetric Shadow Maps 231
so not only saves a considerable amount of storage and bandwidth, but makes
lookups very efficient. In general, the number of transparent fragments at a pixel
will be much larger than the number of AVSM nodes (e.g., Figure 3.6 shows
a transmittance curve with 238 nodes and its 12 nodes counterpart compressed
with AVSM), therefore, we use a streaming compression algorithm that in a single
(post-list-creation) rendering pass approximates the original curve.
Each node of our piecewise transmittance curve maps to an ordered sequence
of pairs (di
, ti) that encode node position (depth) along a light ray and its associated transmittance. AVSMs store the transmittance curve as an array of depthtransmittance pairs (di
, ti) using two single-precision floating-point values2
. An
important ramification of our decision to use a fixed, small number of nodes is
that the entire compressed transmittance curve can fit in on-chip memory during
compression. As with classic shadow maps we clear depth to the far plane value,
while transmittance is set to 1 in order to represent empty space.
We insert each new occluding segment by viewing it as a compositing operation between two transmittance curves, respectively representing the incoming
blocker and the current transmittance curve. Given two light blockers, A and
B, located along the same light ray, we write the density function fAB(x) as
a sum of their density functions fA(x) and fB(x). By simply applying Equation eqrefeq:transmittance we can compute their total transmittance:
ttot(z) = e−
R z
0
fAB(x) dx
= e−
R z
0
fA(x) dx
e
−
R z
0
fB(x) dx = tA(z)tB(z). (3.2)
In the absence of lossy compression, the order of composition is not important.
More relevantly, this equation shows that the resulting total transmittance is
given by the product of the two transmittance functions respectively associated
to each light blocker.
Conceptually, our task is to compute a set of nodes that accurately represents
the full transmittance curve.3 For the first few segments in the linked list, up to
the fixed number of AVSM nodes that we are storing, our task is straightforward:
we insert the segment into the AVSM array. We move the nodes with depths
greater than the new ones (a segment maps to two nodes) one element forward,
making an opening at the offset into the array, at which the new nodes should
be added, and creating new transmittance values for each opening by linearly
interpolating neighboring nodes. We then composite this curve with the curve
represented by the incoming segment (see Equation (3.2)). Once the (on-chip)
array of nodes contains more nodes than can be stored in the AVSM texture,
2
It’s also possible to use half-precision values for relatively simple scenes without incurring
noticeable image artifacts.
3The problem of approximating a polygonal curve P by a simpler polygonal curve Q is of
interest in many fields and has been studied in cartography, computer graphics, and elsewhere;
see our EGSR paper for more references on this topic.
232 IV Shadows
we apply a curve simplification algorithm; our method compresses transmittance
data simply by removing the node that contributes the least to the overall transmittance curve shape. In other words, we remove the node, that once removed,
generates the smallest variation to curve integral (see Figure 3.2). Compression proceeds by removing one node at a time until the maximum node count
is reached. We apply compression only to internal nodes. In practice, this is a
benefit because these uncompressed nodes provide important visual cues such as
transition into a volume or the shadows cast from a volume onto opaque surfaces.
Although transmittance varies exponentially between nodes, like deep shadow
maps, we assume linear variation to simplify area computations. This allows us
to write the transmittance integral It for an N node curve as the sum of N − 1
trapezoidal areas:
It =
N
X−1
i=0
(di+1 − di)(ti + ti+1)
2
.
The removal of an internal ith node affects only the area of the two trapezoids
that share it. Since the rest of the curve is unaffected we compute the variation
of its integral 4ti with a simple, geometrically derived formula:
4ti = |(di+1 − di−1)(ti+1 − ti) − (di+1 − di)(ti+1 − ti−1)|.
In practice, due to the lossy compression, the order in which segments are
inserted can affect the results. In particular, when generating the per-pixel linked
lists in the previous pass, the parallel execution of pixel shaders inserts segments
into the linked lists in an order that may vary per-frame even if the scene and
view are static. Inconsistent ordering can result in visible temporal artifacts,
although they are mostly imperceptible in practice when using eight or more
AVSM nodes or when the volumetric media is moving quickly (e.g., billowing
smoke). In those rare cases when a consistent ordering cannot be preserved and
the number of nodes is not sufficient to hide these artifacts, it is also possible to
sort the captured segments by depth via an insertion sort before inserting them.
We discuss the cost of this sort in Section 3.3.3.
3.2.3 AVSM Sampling
Sampling AVSMs can be seen as a generalization of a standard shadow-map depth
test [Williams 78] of translucent occluders. Instead of a binary depth test, we
evaluate the transmittance function at the receiver depth4
.
Due to the irregular and nonlinear nature of the AVSM data, we cannot rely on
texture-filtering hardware, and we implement filtering in programmable shaders.
For a given texel, we perform a search over the entire domain of the curve to find
4
It’s also possible to render opaque blockers into an AVSM. In this case AVSM sampling
will behave exactly as the method introduced by [Williams 78].
3. Adaptive Volumetric Shadow Maps 233
the two nodes that bound the shadow receiver of depth d, we then interpolate
the bounding nodes’ transmittance (tl
, tr) to intercept the shadow receiver.
In order to locate the two nodes that bound the receiver depth (i.e., a segment), we use a fast two-level search; since our representation stores a fixed
number of nodes, memory accesses tend to be coherent and local, unlike with
variable-length linked-list traversals necessary with techniques like deep shadow
maps [Lokovic and Veach 00]. In fact, the lookups can be implemented entirely
with compile-time (static) branching and array indexing, allowing the compiler
to keep the entire transmittance curve in registers. Listing 3.3 shows an implementation of our AVSM segment-finding algorithm specialized for an eight node
visibility curve, which is also used for both segment insertion and sampling/filtering5
.
As we do at segment-insertion time, we again assume space between two nodes
to exhibit uniform density, which implies that transmittance varies exponentially
between each depth interval (see Equation (3.1)), although we have found linear
interpolation to be a faster and visually acceptable alternative:
T(d) = tl + (d − dl) ·
tr − tl
dr − dl
This simple procedure is the basis for point filtering. Bilinear filtering is straightforward; the transmittance T(d) is evaluated over four neighboring texels and
linearly weighted.
struct AVSMSegment
{
int inde x ;
f l o a t depthA ;
f l o a t depthB ;
f l o a t transA ;
f l o a t transB ;
} ;
AVSMSegment FindSegmentAVSM8 ( i n AVSMData data ,
i n f l o a t r e c ei v e rD e p t h )
{
AVSMSegment Output ;
int inde x ;
f l o a t 4 depth , t r a n s ;
f l o a t l e f tD e p t h , righ tDep th , l e f t T r a n s , ri g h t T r a n s ;
5Please see the accompanying demo source code for a generalized implementation that supports 4-, 8-, 12- and 16-node AVSM textures.
234 IV Shadows
// We s t a r t by i d e n t i f y i n g the r e n d e r t a r g e t t h a t . .
// . . c o n t ai n s the nodes we a r e l o o ki n g f o r . .
i f ( r e c ei v e rD e p t h > data . depth [ 0 ] [ 3 ] ) {
depth = data . depth [ 1 ] ;
t r a n s = data . t r a n s [ 1 ] ;
l e f tD e p t h = data . depth [ 0 ] [ 3 ] ;
l e f t T r a n s = data . t r a n s [ 0 ] [ 3 ] ;
ri gh tDep th = data . depth [ 1 ] [ 3 ] ;
ri g h t T r a n s = data . t r a n s [ 1 ] [ 3 ] ;
Output . inde x = 4 ;
} e l s e {
depth = data . depth [ 0 ] ;
t r a n s = data . t r a n s [ 0 ] ;
l e f tD e p t h = data . depth [ 0 ] [ 0 ] ;
l e f t T r a n s = data . t r a n s [ 0 ] [ 0 ] ;
ri gh tDep th = data . depth [ 1 ] [ 0 ] ;
ri g h t T r a n s = data . t r a n s [ 1 ] [ 0 ] ;
Output . inde x = 0 ;
}
// . . we then l o o k f o r the e x a c t nodes t h a t wrap . .
// . . around the shadow r e c e i v e r .
i f ( r e c ei v e rD e p t h <= depth [ 0 ] ) {
Output . depthA = l e f tD e p t h ;
Output . depthB = depth [ 0 ] ;
Output . transA = l e f t T r a n s ;
Output . transB = t r a n s [ 0 ] ;
} e l s e i f ( r e c ei v e rD e p t h <= depth [ 1 ] ) {
. . . .
. . . .
} e l s e {
Output . inde x += 4 ;
Output . depthA = depth [ 3 ] ;
Output . depthB = ri gh tDep th ;
Output . transA = t r a n s [ 3 ] ;
Output . transB = ri g h t T r a n s ;
}
return Output ;
}
Listing 3.3. Segment finding code for 8-node AVSM data.
3.3 Comparisons
We have compared AVSM to a ground-truth result, deep shadow maps (DSM),
Fourier opacity maps (FOM), and opacity shadow maps (OSM). All techniques
were implemented using the DirectX11 rendering and compute APIs.
All results are gathered on an Intel Core i7 quad-core CPU running at 3.33
GHz running Windows 7 (64-bit) and an ATI Radeon 5870 GPU.
3. Adaptive Volumetric Shadow Maps 235
[ u n r o l l ] fo r ( i = 0 ; i < AVSM NODE COUNT + 2 ; ++i ) {
// Compute r e n d e r t a r g e t and v e c t o r elemen t i n d i c e s
const int r t I d x = i >> 2 ;
const int elem Idx = i & 0 x3 ;
f l o a t tempDepth , tempTrans ;
// I n s e r t l a s t segment node
[ f l a t t e n ] i f ( i == postMoveSegmentEndIdx ) {
tempDepth = segmentDepth [ 1 ] ;
tempTrans = newNodesTransO f fset [ 1 ] ;
// I n s e r t f i r s t segment node
} e l s e i f ( i == postMoveSegmentStart Idx ) {
tempDepth = segmentDepth [ 0 ] ;
tempTrans = newNodesTransO f fset [ 0 ] ;
// Update a l l nodes i n between the new two nodes
} e l s e i f ( ( i > postMoveSegmentStart Idx ) &&
( i < postMoveSegmentEndIdx ) ) {
tempDepth = depth [ i −1];
tempTrans = t r a n s [ i −1];
// Update a l l nodes l o c a t e d behind the new two nodes
} e l s e i f ( ( i > 1 ) && ( i > postMoveSegmentEndIdx ) ) {
tempDepth = depth [ i −2];
tempTrans = t r a n s [ i −2];
// Update a l l nodes l o c a t e d i n f r o n t the new two nodes
} e l s e {
tempDepth = depth [ i ] ;
tempTrans = t r a n s [ i ] ;
}
// Li n e a rl y i n t e r p o l a t e s t r a n smi t t a n c e al o n g the incoming . .
// . . segment and c omp o si te i t with the c u r r e n t cu r ve
tempTrans ∗= I n t e r p ( segmentDepth [ 0 ] , segmentDepth [ 1 ] ,
FIRST NODE TRANS VALUE,
segmentTransmittance , tempDepth ) ;
// Generate new nodes
newDepth [ r t I d x ] [ elem Idx ] = d ;
newTrans [ r t I d x ] [ elem Idx ] = t ;
}
Listing 3.2. Segment insertion code for AVSMs. Note that there is no dynamic branching nor dynamic indexing in this implementation, which makes it possible for intermediate values to be stored in registers and for efficient GPU execution.
236 IV Shadows
Figure 3.3. A comparison of smoke added to a scene from a recent game title with AVSM
with 12 nodes (left) and deep shadow maps (right). Rendering the complete frame takes
approximately 32 ms, with AVSM generation and lookups consuming approximately 11
ms of that time. AVSM is 1–2 orders of magnitude faster than a GPU implementation
of deep shadow maps and the uncompressed algorithm, yet produce a nearly identical
result. (Thanks to Valve Corporation for the game scene.)
Figure 3.4. Comparison of AVSM, Fourier opacity maps, and opacity shadow maps to
the ground-truth uncompressed result in a scene with three separate smoke columns
casting shadows on each other: AVSM with eight nodes (top left), ground-truth uncompressed (top right), Fourier opacity maps with 16 expansion terms (bottom left), and
opacity shadow maps with 32 slices (bottom right). Note how closely AVSM matches
the ground-truth image. While the artifacts of the other methods do not appear problematic in these still images, the artifacts are more apparent when animated. Note that
the differerent images have been enhanced by 4x to make the comparison more clear.
3. Adaptive Volumetric Shadow Maps 237
Figure 3.5. This scene compares (from left to right) AVSM (12 nodes), uncompressed,
opacity shadow maps (32 slices), and Fourier opacity maps (16 expansion terms). Note
that AVSM-12 and uncompressed are nearly identical and the other methods show
substantial artifacts. In particular FOM suffers from severe over-darkening/ringing
problems generated by high-frequency light blockers like hair and by less-than-optimal
depth bounds. Also note that these images use only bilinear shadow filtering. Using a
higher-quality filtering kernel substantially improves the shadow quality.
3.3.1 Qualitative Evaluation
Figure 3.3 shows AVSMs (12 nodes) compared to deep shadow maps (error threshold set to 0.002). There is little perceptible difference between the results, demonstrating that for this real-time scene, our decision to permit variable error per
texel is not a problem. The accuracy of AVSM is further validated by inspecting the transmittance curves and seeing that even with eight nodes, AVSM very
closely approximates the true transmittance curves. The results for sampling the
uncompressed data also look identical. Our experience is that eight nodes results
in acceptable visual quality for all views and configurations in this scene. All
shadow map sizes in these images are 2562
.
Figure 3.4 shows a visual comparison among 8-node AVSM, 16-term Fourier
opacity maps, and 32-slice opacity shadow maps against the ground-truth uncompressed result for a scene with three smoke columns casting shadows on each
other. Note how much more closely the AVSM matches the ground-truth uncompressed result. The quality improvements are especially noticeable when
animated. A key benefit of AVSM compared with these other real-time methods
is that AVSM quality is much less affected by the depth range covered by the
volumetric occluders.
3.3.2 Quantitative Evaluation
We validate the AVSM compression algorithm accuracy by inspecting a number
of transmittance curves and comparing to the ground-truth uncompressed data
as well as the deep shadow map compression technique. Overall, we see that
the 4-node AVSM shows significant deviations from the correct result, 8-node
AVSM matches closely with a few noticeable deviations, and 12-node AVSM
often matches almost exactly.
Figure 3.6 shows a transmittance curve from a combination of smoke and hair
(see image in Figure 3.5) with discrete steps for each blonde hair and smooth
238 IV Shadows
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Uncompressed (238 Nodes)
Fourier Opacity Maps (16 terms)
Opacity Shadow Maps (32 slices)
Adaptive Volumetric Shadow Maps (12 Nodes)
Deep Shadow Maps
Figure 3.6. Transmittance curves computed for a scene with a mix of smoke and hair
for AVSM (12 nodes) and the ground-truth uncompressed data (238 nodes). The hairs
generate sharp reductions in transmittance, whereas the smoke generates gradually,
decreasing transmittance. AVSM matches the ground-truth data much more closely
than the other real-time methods.
transitions in the smokey regions. Note that the 12-node AVSM matches the
ground-truth data much more closely than the opacity or Fourier shadow map
(both of which use more memory than AVSM to represent shadow data) and
is similar to the deep shadow map but uses less memory and is 1–2 orders of
magnitude faster